---
title: 'Classification of Riemann surfaces'
date: 2020-07-22
permalink: /test/
tags:
  - Complex Analysis
  - Riemann Surfaces
---

The uniformisation theorem states that every simply connected Riemann surface $X$ is conformally isomorphic to either the unit disk $\mathbb{D}$, the complex plane $\mathbb{C}$ or the Riemann sphere $\mathbb{P}^1$. The classical proof relies heavily on techniques in potential theory including the Dirichlet principle and the Perron method. (Refer to Forster's book<sup>[2](#fn2)</sup>.) Rather than discussing the proof in detail, I am more interested in some of the immediate applications of the uniformisation theorem. This includes classification of Riemann surfaces in general.

Let's review a bit of covering space theory. Every connected Riemann surface $X$ admits a universal cover $p : Z \to X$, unique up to homeomorphism. The space $Z$ can be endowed with the pullback complex structure from $X$ such that $Z$ is a simply connected Riemann surface and $p$ is holomorphic. Consequently, with respect to this complex structure, the deck transformations of $p$ are automatically conformal automorphisms of $Z$ forming a subgroup $\Gamma$ of the group $\text{Aut}(Z)$ of all conformal automorphisms of $Z$. Surely, $\Gamma$ must be a discrete subgroup acting freely and properly discontinuously on $Z$.

The goal for now is to see what $\Gamma$ looks like for every possible $Z$. This will help us see what kind of Riemann surfaces have which universal covers. We will say that $X$ is **elliptic**/**spherical** if it is covered by $Z = \mathbb{P}^1$, **Euclidean**/**parabolic** if $Z = \mathbb{C}$, and **hyperbolic** if $Z = \mathbb{D}$.

## Elliptic Riemann surfaces

Suppose $Z$ is the Riemann sphere. A result in complex analysis states that every holomorphic self map of the Riemann sphere is a rational map $p(z)/q(z)$ where $p$ and $q$ are polynomials. Consequently, the group $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{P}^1)$ of conformal automorphisms of $\mathbb{P}^1$ has to be the group of Möbius transformations, often denoted as $PSL(2,\mathbb{C})$:

$$
\text{Aut}(\mathbb{P}^1) = \Big\{ \frac{az+b}{cz+d} \: \Big\vert \: a,b,c,d \in \mathbb{C}, ad-bc \neq 0 \Big\}.
$$

A simple algebraic exercise should convince you that every Möbius transformation has a fixed point. As such, every subgroup $\Gamma$ of $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{P}^1)$ does not act freely on $\mathbb{P}^1$ unless $\Gamma$ is the trivial group consisting only of the identity map. Therefore, every connected Riemann surface $X$ which admits a universal cover $\mathbb{P}^1$ must be $\mathbb{P}^1$ itself!

## Parabolic Riemann surfaces

Suppose $Z$ is the complex plane. Every conformal automorphism $f \in \text{Aut}(\mathbb{C})$ can be extended to a conformal automorphism of $\mathbb{P}^1$ by applying Riemann's theorem of removable singularities. The extension must have a fixed point at $\infty$ and the only Möbius transformations fixing $\infty$ are linear maps. In short,

$$
\text{Aut}(\mathbb{C}) = \{ az+b \: \vert \: a,b \in \mathbb{C}, a \neq 0 \}.
$$

Since we are only interested in subgroups acting freely, we only care about non-identity elements without fixed points, namely translations $\gamma_b(z) = z+b$ where $b\neq 0$. Another simple algebraic exercise should convince you that every translation is conjugate to each other in $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{C})$, so then we may as well assume that $\Gamma$ contains the real unit translation $\gamma_1$ and every other non-identity element $\gamma_c$ in $\Gamma$ satisfies $|c|\geq 1$. We shall consider two non-trivial cases:
* $\Gamma$ is generated by $\gamma_1$. This produces a bi-infinite cylinder conformally isomorphic to the punctured plane $\mathbb{C}^\*$ by the map $\mathbb{C}/\Gamma \to \mathbb{C}^\*, z \mapsto e^{2\pi i z}$.
* $\Gamma$ contains some $\gamma_b$ where $b \not\in \mathbb{Z}$ and $|b|\geq 1$. The value $b$ cannot be real for otherwise there is an integral linear combination of $1$ and $b$ that has absolute value less than $1$. $\Gamma$ cannot contain an element $\gamma_c$ where $c$ is in $\mathbb{Z} + b\mathbb{Z}$, i.e. $c$ is an integral linear combination of $1$ and $b$, for otherwise $\Gamma$ would not be discrete. $\mathbb{Z} + b\mathbb{Z}$ form a discrete lattice on $\mathbb{C}$; if $\Gamma$ is generated by $\gamma_1$ and $\gamma_b$, then $X$ is a (complex) torus, often denoted by $\mathbb{C} / \mathbb{Z} + b\mathbb{Z}$.
As such, every parabolic Riemann surface is conformally isomorphic to either the plane $\mathbb{C}$, the punctured plane $\mathbb{C}^\*$ or a complex torus. The only compact one is the latter.

I have to emphasise that a topological torus can support infinitely many complex structures. Suppose we have a conformal isomorphism $f : \mathbb{C} / \mathbb{Z} + b\mathbb{Z} \to \mathbb{C} / \mathbb{Z} + c\mathbb{Z}$ between two tori where $b$ and $c$ are assumed to be on the upper half plane $\mathbb{H}$. This map lifts to a conformal automorphism $g$ of $\mathbb{C}$ fixing $0$ &mdash; hence, of the form $g(z) = \alpha z$ &mdash; such that $g$ restricts to an isomorphism from the lattice $\mathbb{C} / \mathbb{Z} + b\mathbb{Z}$ to the lattice $\mathbb{C} / \mathbb{Z} + c\mathbb{Z}$. Therefore, there are integers $p,q,r,s \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that

$$
c = \alpha(p b + q), \quad 1 = \alpha(r b + s).
$$

In other words, $c = h(b)$ where $h(z) = \frac{pz+q}{rz + s}$. The map $h$ must be invertible because $g$ is invertible, so then $h$ lies in the modular group $PSL(2,\mathbb{Z})$. The group $PSL(2,\mathbb{Z})$ is a discrete subgroup of $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{H})$ (we shall see more of $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{H})$ below) and since the set of orbits $\mathbb{H} / PSL(2,\mathbb{Z})$ is infinite, a torus can have infinitely many complex structures.

## Hyperbolic Riemann surfaces

It then follows from above that a Riemann surface $X$ must be hyperbolic if it is not conformally isomorphic to $\mathbb{P}^1$, $\mathbb{C}$, $\mathbb{C}^\*$ or a complex torus. We will first look at a few special cases:
* Suppose $X$ is a compact Riemann surface of genus $g$. If $g \geq 2$, then it is not homeomorphic to the sphere $\mathbb{P}^1$ nor the torus. Thus, $X$ admits a hyperbolic complex structure.
* Suppose $X$ is a two-punctured plane, then it must be hyperbolic since it is clearly topologically different from elliptic or parabolic Riemann surfaces. This fact has an important consequence.

> **_Little Picard Theorem:_** The image of a non-constant entire function is either $\mathbb{C}$ or $\mathbb{C}\backslash \\{p\\}$ for some point $p$.

Indeed, if a non-constant entire function $f$ omits two values $p$ and $q$, then we can lift $f$ to a non-constant entire map $f_1 : \mathbb{C} \to \mathbb{D}$ via the universal cover $\mathbb{D} \to \mathbb{C}\backslash\\{p,q\\}$. However, such a lift $f_1$ should not exist by Liouville's theorem. (See Ahlfors<sup>[1](#fn1)</sup> Chapter 8 $\S 3$ for another proof.)

* Suppose $X$ is a domain in $\mathbb{C}$ such that $\mathbb{C} \backslash X$ contains more than 2 points. Clearly, $X$ is not elliptic because it is not compact and, by Little Picard theorem, $X$ cannot be parabolic. Therefore, $X$ is a hyperbolic Riemann surface.

To obtain more concrete examples, let's consider discrete subgroups of $\mathbb{D}$. A consequence of Schwarz Lemma is that this group is just the group of degree 1 Blashcke products:

$$
\text{Aut}(\mathbb{D}) = \Big\{ \zeta \frac{a-z}{1-\bar{a}z} \: \Big\vert \: \lvert\zeta\rvert = 1, a \in \mathbb{D} \Big\}.
$$

It is often easier to work with the upper half plane model of the With the aid of conformal automorphism $\Phi : \mathbb{H} \to \mathbb{D}, z \mapsto \frac{i-z}{i+z}$, we can obtain $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{H})$ by working out $\Phi^{-1} \text{Aut}(\mathbb{D}) \Phi$. This turns out to be the group $PSL(2,\mathbb{R})$:

$$
\text{Aut}(\mathbb{H}) = \Big\{ \frac{az+b}{cz+d} \: \Big\vert \: a,b,c,d \in \mathbb{R}, ad-bc > 0 \Big\}.
$$

Notice that $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{H})$ is a subgroup of $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{C})$ consisting of all Möbius transformations preserving the upper half plane. Every element that has no fixed point in $\mathbb{H}$ turns out to be conjugate to either a translation $\sigma_{\pm}(z) = z \pm 1$ or a dilation $\tau_a(z) = az$ where $a>1$. Let $X$ be a hyperbolic Riemann surface with covering group $\Gamma$, a discrete subgroup of $\text{Aut}(\mathbb{H})$ acting freely and properly discontinuously.
* When $\Gamma$ is generated by $\sigma_{+}$, the quotient $X$ is a semi-infinite cylinder conformally isomorphic to the punctured disk $\mathbb{D}^\*$ by the map $X \to \mathbb{D}^\*, z \mapsto e^{2\pi i z}$.
* When $\Gamma$ is generated by $\tau_a$ for some $a>1$, the quotient $X$ is an annulus conformally isomorphic to the regular concentric annulus $A = \\{ e^{-2\pi^2/\ln a} < \lvert z \rvert <1 \\}$ by the map $X \to A, z \mapsto z^{2\pi i/\ln a}$.

Similar to the torus case, a topological annulus admits infinitely many complex structures. Using the notation $A_r = \\{ 1<\lvert z\rvert < r \\}$ for any $r>1$, let $f: A_r \to A_s$ be a conformal isomorphism mapping the inner boundary of $A_r$ to the inner boundary of $A_s$. The map $f$ lifts to a conformal automorphism $g \in \text{Aut}(\mathbb{H})$ which maps the negative (resp. positive) real axis onto itself, so then $g = \tau_\alpha$ for some $\alpha >0$. However, by invariance under deck transformations of $f$ and $f^{-1}$, we must have the equation $f(az) = bf(z)$ where $a = e^{2\pi^2/\ln r}$ and $b = e^{2\pi^2/\ln s}$. This forces $r$ to be equal to $s$. As such, two concentric annuli are conformally isomorphic if and only if they have the same ratio of outer to inner radii.

More complicated hyperbolic Riemann surfaces arise when $\Gamma$ has at least two generators. The possibility is rather endless, but the least I can do is give one more example. Suppose $\Gamma$ is generated by the dilation $\tau_2$ and the conformal automorphism $\phi(z) = \frac{2z+1}{z+2}$. It turns out that $\Gamma$ is a free group and the quotient $X$ is a punctured torus. This can perhaps be seen by looking at the fundamental domain of $\Gamma$.

### References
<a name="fn1">1</a>: L. Ahlfors. Complex Analysis. McGraw-Hill, 1979.   
<a name="fn2">2</a>: O. Forster. Lectures on Riemann surfaces. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Vol 81. Springer-Verlag, NY-Berlin, 1981.  
<a name="fn3">3</a>: J. H. Hubbard. Teichmüller Theory and Applications to Geometry, Topology, and Dynamics. Vol. 1. Matrix Editions, Ithaca, NY, 2006.  

------
