---
title: 'Why Kähler geometry?'
date: 2022-04-09
permalink: /posts/2022/04/kahler/
tags:
  - Complex geometry
  - Riemannian geometry
---

I am by no means an expert in complex geometry. This post is an attempt to capture the basics of Kähler geometry from the point of view of a non-expert, and is written for those of you who have limited background in such and wonder what makes Kähler manifolds worth studying. Most of the content here is based on a talk I gave in a student differential grometry seminar in Stony Brook.

## Hermitian manifolds

We would like to think of a complex vector space as a pair $(V,J)$ where $V$ is a real vector space and $J :V \to V$ is an automorphism such that $J^2 = - Id$. An $\mathbb{R}$-linear map $L: V \to V$ is $\mathbb{C}$-linear if $LJ=JL$. We would also like to think of a complex manifold as a pair $(M,J)$ where $M$ is a smooth real manifold and $J$ is a global section of the bundle $End(TM)$ such that $(T_pM, J_p)$ is a complex vector space for every $p \in M$, and that $M$ satisfies further integrability condition. (This is the Newlander-Nirenberg theorem.)

A Riemannian metric $\langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle$ on a complex manifold $(M,J)$ is **Hermitian** if at every point $p \in M$, for every pair of tangent vectors $X, Y \in T_pM$, $\langle J_p X, J_p Y \rangle = \langle X, Y \rangle$. The **fundamental form** of a Hermitian metric $\langle \cdot,\cdot \rangle$ is a real, nowhere vanishing $2$-form $w$ where $w(X,Y) = \langle JX, Y \rangle$.

It should be easy to see that the fundamental form also defines the metric because we have the formula $\langle X, Y \rangle = w(X, JY)$. Also, it is not difficult to make Hermitian metrics out of Riemannian metrics. For example, for any Riemannian metric $\langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle$, the metric defined by $\langle X,Y\rangle + \langle JX ,JY \rangle$ is automatically Hermitian.

On $\mathbb{C}^n$, it is standard to take $J$ to be multiplication by $i$: $J(z_1, \ldots, z_n) = (iz_1, \ldots, iz_n)$. (Of course, there are many other possible choices of $J$.) The inner product $\langle x, y \rangle = \text{Re}(x^T \bar{y})$ on $\mathbb{C}^n$ is Hermitian.

## Kähler manifolds

One of the fundamental concepts in Riemannian geometry is parallel transport. It is natural to ask when is the complex structure $J$ is compatible with such process. It turns out that this is reduced to a mere computation of the exterior derivative $dw$.

> **_Lemma:_** Let $\langle \cdot,\cdot \rangle$ be a Hermitian metric on a complex manifold $(M,J)$ and let $\nabla$ denote the corresponding Levi-Civita connection. The following are equivalent.
1. $\nabla_Y (JX) = J \nabla_Y X$ for every pair of vector fields $X$ and $Y$;
2. $dw = 0$.

I had a hard time finding an easy proof of this in the literature, so I wrote one up myself here. By the invariant formula, for any triplet of vector fields $X_1$, $X_2,$ and $X_3$, we have

$$
dw(X_1, X_2, X_3) = \sum_{(i,j,k) \in S} X_i \left( \langle J X_j,X_k\rangle \right) - \langle J [X_i,X_j], X_k \rangle,
$$

where $S = \\\{(1,2,3),(2,3,1),(3,1,2)\\\}$. Since the connection $\nabla$ is torsion-free and compatible with the metric, the expression above becomes

$$
\sum_{(i,j,k) \in S} \langle \nabla_{X_i} (J X_j), X_k \rangle + \langle J X_j, \nabla_{X_i} X_k \rangle - \langle J \nabla_{X_i} X_j, X_k \rangle + \langle J \nabla_{X_j} X_i, X_k \rangle.
$$

Since the metric is Hermitian, the second and fourth sums become zero:

$$
\sum_{(i,j,k) \in S} \langle J X_j, \nabla_{X_i} X_k \rangle + \langle J \nabla_{X_j} X_i, X_k \rangle = \sum_{(i,j,k) \in S} - \langle J \nabla_{X_i} X_k, X_j \rangle + \langle J \nabla_{X_j} X_i, X_k \rangle = 0.
$$

We are left with

$$
dw(X_1, X_2, X_3) = \sum_{(i,j,k) \in S} \langle \nabla_{X_i} (J X_j) - J \nabla_{X_i} X_j, X_k \rangle,
$$

which directly proves the lemma.

A Hermitian metric $\langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle$ and its associated fundamental form $w$ on a complex manifold $(M,J)$ are called **Kähler** if statement 1 and/or 2 in the lemma above holds. Also, we say that $(M,J)$ is **Kähler** if it admits a Kähler metric.

For computations, it is convenient to know what Hermitian and Kähler metrics look like in locally. In local coordinates, the fundamental form $w$ can be written as

$$
w = \frac{i}{2} \sum_{\alpha,\beta = 1}^n h_{\alpha \bar{\beta}} dz_\alpha \wedge d\bar{z}_\beta,
$$

where $(h_{\alpha \bar{\beta}})\_{\alpha, \beta}$ is a positive definite Hermitian matrix. Moreover, it is Kähler precisely when $\partial w = \bar{\partial} w = 0$, or equivalently $\frac{\partial h_{\alpha, \bar{\beta}}}{\partial z_\gamma} = \frac{ \partial h_{\gamma, \bar{\alpha}}}{\partial z_\beta}$ for all $\alpha, \beta,\gamma$.

The Kähler assumption induces some topological constraints. Let $w$ be a Kähler form on a compact $n$-dimensional complex manifold $M$. For $k\geq 2$, the $2k$-form $w^k := w \wedge \ldots \wedge w$ is closed because $dw^k = k dw \wedge w^{k-1} = 0$. By direct computation, one can show that in local coordinates,

$$
\frac{w^n}{n!} = \left( \frac{i}{2} \right)^n \text{det}(h_{\alpha \bar{\beta}}) dz_1 \wedge d\bar{z}_2 \wedge \ldots \wedge dz_n \wedge d\bar{z}_n
$$

and this actually coincides with the volume form! Therefore, $w^n$ (and so every $w^k$) cannot be exact.

> **_Corollary:_** If $M$ is a compact Kähler manifold of complex dimension $n$, then for all $k = 1,\ldots n$, $H^{2k}(M,\mathbb{R}) \neq 0$.

There are actually further constraints on the cohomology of a compact Kähler manifold arising from Hodge theory. This is a big subject and I'll leave it to you to explore on your own. :)

Let's list some easy examples and non-examples of Kähler manifolds.
1. $\mathbb{C}^n$ is Kähler. The flat metric has fundamental form $w_{\mathbb{C}^n} = \frac{i}{2} \sum_j dz_j \wedge d\bar{z}_j$.
2. For any lattice $\Lambda \subset \mathbb{C}^n$, the complex $n$-torus $\mathbb{C}^n/ \Lambda$ is Kähler. The form $w_{\mathbb{C}^n}$ is translation invariant and therefore induces a Kähler form on $\mathbb{C}^n/ \Lambda$.
3. The Fubini-Study metric (which can be obtained by pushing forward the round metric on $S^{2n+1} = \\\{ z \in \mathbb{C}^{n+1} : \vert z\vert = 1\\\}$ by the quotient $S^{2n+1} \to \mathbb{P}^n = S^{2n+1}/\_{z \sim e^{i\theta} z \text{ for any }\theta}$) $w_{FS}$ on the complex projective space $\mathbb{P}^n$ is Kähler.
3. For $n\geq 2$, the Hopf manifold $M = (\mathbb{C}^n \backslash \\\{0\\\})/_{z \sim 2z}$ is a compact complex manifold that is diffeomorphic to $S^{2n-1} \times S^1$. Since $H^2(M,\mathbb{R}) = 0$ (e.g. using the Kunneth formula), $M$ is not Kähler.

## Kähler submanifolds

We say that a manifold $M$ is a(n) (embedded complex) submanifold of a complex manifold $(\bar{M}, \bar{J})$ if it is the image of an embedding $\iota: M \to \bar{M}$ satisfying $D\iota \circ \bar{J}\vert_M = \bar{J}\vert_M \circ D\iota$ on $M$, or equivalently $\bar{J}_p T_pM \subset T_pM$ at every point $p \in M$. A submanifold $M \subset \bar{M}$ is naturally equipped with the complex structure $J:= \bar{J}\vert_M$. In the point of view of Riemannian geometry, submanifolds of Kähler manifolds turn out to be quite special.

> **_Theorem:_** Let $(\bar{M}, \bar{J})$ be a complex manifold with Kähler form $w_{\bar{M}}$ and $\iota: M \to \bar{M}$ be a submanifold.
1. $w_M := \iota^*w_{\bar{M}}$ is a Kähler form on $M$;
2. $M$ is minimal, i.e. it has zero mean curvature.

The first statement should be immediate because $dw_M = \iota^* dw_{\bar{M}} = 0$. The second can be obtained through the concept of the second fundamental form $B$, that the symmetric bilinear form $B$ where for any vector fields $X$ and $Y$ of $M$, $B(X,Y)$ is defined to be the normal component $(\bar{\nabla}_X Y)^N$. The trace of $B$ is the mean curvature of $M$. Since $M$ is also Kähler, $B$ is $\mathbb{C}$-linear:

$$
B(JX,Y) = (\bar{\nabla}_X (JY))^N = (J \bar{\nabla}_X Y)^N = J (\bar{\nabla}_X Y)^N = J B(X,Y).
$$

The fact that $M$ is a submanifold blesses $M$ with the existence of a local orthonormal basis of the tangent bundle of the form $\\\{e_1, J e_1, \ldots, e_m, Je_m\\\}$. We finally see that $B$ vanishes everywhere:

$$
\sum_j B(e_j, e_j) + B(J e_j, J e_j) = \sum_j B(e_j, e_j) + J^2 B(e_j, e_j) = 0.
$$

Submanifolds of $\mathbb{C}^n$ are often called **Stein** manifolds, whereas submanifolds of $\mathbb{P}^n$ are often called **projective** manifolds. Both Stein and projective manifolds are objects of high interest in the field of complex geometry. For one thing, we now know that they are minimal!

### References
<a name="fn1">1</a>: Lawson. B. Minimal Varieties In Real and Complex Geometry. Presses de l'Université de Montréal, 1974.    
<a name="fn2">2</a>: Huybrechts. D. Complex Geometry: An Introduction. Springer, 2005.   
------
