---
title: 'Summary of my PhD thesis'
date: 2025-01-01
permalink: /posts/2025/01/thesis
tags:
  - Dynamical systems
  - Holomorphic dynamics
  - Graduate student life
---

Hi it's Will and I'm the same but I have finally completed my PhD so I'm not. Somehow I managed to write a 230 page long [thesis](/files/PhD_Thesis.pdf). Am I going insane? Well, that's not the question I would like to answer just yet. If whoever is reading this is interested in my research and is intimidated by the page count, you are in the right place! Below, I will summarize my PhD thesis in a few paragraphs.

## Basic background

The only dynamically non-trivial endomorphisms of a compact Riemann surface are degree $d\geq 2$ rational maps $f(z)=p(z)/q(z)$ on the $\hat{\mathbb{C}} = \mathbb{C} \cup \\\{\infty\\\}$. The phase space of $f$ can be decomposed into the Fatou set $F(f) \subset \hat{\mathbb{C}}$ and the Julia set $J(f) \subset \hat{\mathbb{C}}$. (See this [old post](/posts/2020/06/fatou_and_julia/) for details.) A theorem by Sullivan states that every component $U$ of $F(f)$ must eventually be mapped to a periodic component. Periodic Fatou components can be classified into two: either it is attractive (where points converge to a unique cycle of periodic points under iteration) or rotational (where the dynamics is conjugate to irrational rotation $R_\theta(z) = e^{2\pi i \theta} z).

A rational map $f$ is called hyperbolic if $f$ is uniformly expanding on the Julia set $J(f)$ (with respect to some metric), or equivalently every critical point of $f$ lies in the basin of an attracting cycle. Hyperbolic rational maps are tame and easy to understand. For example, their Julia sets always have zero measure. A fundamental conjecture in the field states within the space of rational maps of a fixed degree, the hyperbolic ones form a dense open subset. Even in the simplest case $d=2$, modern approaches to this conjecture (and other difficult problems) have so far led to the rather complicated study of non-hyperbolic rational maps admitting rotational Fatou components.

If a fixed Fatou component $U$ is rotational, either $U$ is simply connected or it is doubly connected; the former is called **Siegel disk** and the latter is called **Herman ring**. If $U$ is a Siegel disk, then $f:U \to U$ is conformally conjugate to irrational rotation on the unit disk $R_\theta: \mathbb{D} \to \mathbb{D}$. If $U$ is a Herman ring, then $f: U \to U$ is conformally conjugate to irrational rotation on a round annulus $\\\{1<|z|<e^{2\pi m}\\\}$; here, the constant $m>0$ is a conformal invariant called the **modulus** of $U$. Siegel disks admit a fixed point in the middle, but Herman rings don't. This fact alone brings many challenges to finding examples of, ruling out the presence of, and deducing the properties of Herman rings. Another difference is that Herman rings can be deformed: one can always find a $1$-parameter family $f_m$, $m>0$ of rational maps where each $f_m$ admits a Herman ring of modulus $m$ and given any other number $m'>0$, there is a quasiconformal conjugacy $\phi$, i.e. $f_{m'} = \phi \circ f_m \circ \phi^{-1}$, that is conformal at the set of points whose orbit never lands at the Herman ring.

## A priori bounds on Herman rings

One open problem is to study limits of degenerating of Herman rings. In particular, given the deformation family $\\\{f_m\\\}_{m>0}$ described in the previous paragraph, does $f_m$ converge to a limit as $m \to 0$? If a limit $f_0$ exists, does it admit an invariant set that is the limit of Herman rings of $f_m$? If so, what does this invariant set look like and can we describe the dynamics? Nobody really knew how to tackle this problem. This is where my thesis came in!

Let's call an irrational number $\theta \in (0,1)$ to be of **bounded type** if the terms $\\\{a_i\\\}_{i\geq 1\}$ in the [continued fraction expansion](/posts/2021/01/continued-fractions/) $\theta = [a_1,a_2,a_3,\ldots]$ are uniformly bounded by some number $B$. A theorem by Gaofei Zhang states that if a Siegel disk or a Herman ring $U$ of a rational map $f$ has bounded type rotation number, then every component of $\partial U$ is a [quasicircle](/posts/2021/12/quasicircles/) and it must contain a critical point of $f$. Roughly speaking, a Jordan arc $\gamma$ is a quasicircle when at almost every point, the interior angle and the exterior angle are uniformly bounded below by a positive constant which we will call the dilatation of $\gamma$.

>**_Theorem (A Priori Bounds):_** Given any degree $d \geq 3$ and bounded type irrational $\theta \in (0,1)$, there exists a degree $d$ rational map $f$ with a unique Herman ring such that, if we denote by $\\\{f_m\\\}$ the corresponding deformation family, then the boundaries of the Herman ring $H_m$ of $H_m$ are quasicircles with uniform dilatation independent of $m$.

The proof takes about 40 pages... it's rather long and technical. In it, the map $f$ is chosen to satisfy a number of axioms that are all quite easy to be satisfied. The main consequence of this theorem is that now you know what happens as $m \to 0$.

>**_Corollary_** $f_m$ converges to a limit $f_0$. The closure of the Herman ring of $f_m$ converges in Hausdorff metric to a quasicircle $H_0$ containing a critical point of $f_0$. $H_0$ is invariant under $f_0$ and $f_0 : H_0 \to H_0$ is conjugate to irrational rotation $R_\theta$ on the unit circle.

I call such an invariant rotational curve $H_0$ a **Herman curve** of a rational map. Using this theorem, one can also construct examples of Herman curves which are not round circles; this was previously an open problem.

## Critical quasicircle maps

A critical quasicircle map $(f,X)$ is a holomorphic map $f$ admitting an invariant quasicircle $X$ such that $f:X \to X$ is conjugate to irrational rotation $R_\theta$ of the unit circle and $X$ contains exactly one critical point $c$ of $f$. One can define the inner criticality $d_{in}$ of $f$ to be the number of points in $f^{-1}(z)$ that are contained inside of $X$ for any point $z$ inside of $X$ that is close to $f(c)$; an outer degree $d_{out}$ can be defined similarly by replacing the word ``inside`` with ``outside``.

Well known examples include critical circle maps (when $X=S^1$), and due to Schwarz reflection principle, the inner and outer criticalities must coincide. For many decades, the study of circle maps has been, and it still is, of great interest to many people in math and physics. Herman curves of rational maps from the previous corollary provide new examples of critical quasicircle maps with arbitrary imbalanced criticalities.

>**_Theorem (Rigidity): _** Given two critical quasicircle maps $(f_1,X_1)$ and $(f_2,g_2)$ of the same bounded type rotation number $\theta$ and the same inner and outer criticalities, the conjugacy $X_1 \to X_2$ between $f_1$ and $f_2$ is $C^1$ smooth with H\"older continuous derivatives.

The precise regularity of the conjugacy is quasiconformal on the neighborhood of $X_1$ and $C^{1+\alpha}$-conformal along $X_1$. It has many consequences. For example, we now know that given a bounded type critical quasicircle map $(f,X)$, the invariant curve $X$ is smooth if and only if the inner and outer criticalities coincide. Also, if the rotation number $\theta$ is periodic type (e.g. golden mean $\theta=[1,1,1,1,\ldots] or the number $\sqrt{3}-1 = [1,2,1,2,1,2,\ldots]$), then $X$ is asymptotically self-similar at the critical point $c$.

## Renormalization theory

The proof of rigidity relies on the notion of renormalization. I will try to describe the main idea, sparing most of the details. Let us first work with the standard irrational rotation $R_\theta(z)=e^{2\pi i \theta}z$ on $S^1$. Suppose the rotation number $\theta$ has continued fraction expansion $[a_1,a_2,a_3,\ldots]$, then we will denote by $p_n/q_n$ the rational approximation $[a_1,a_2,\ldots,a_n]$. The denominator $q_n$ encodes the first return times of the iterates of $1$ (or any other point in $S^1$) back to $1$, namely $|R_\theta^{q_n}-1|<|R_\theta^t-1|$ for all $t<q_n$. The returns are alternating:
$$
  R^{q_1}(1) < R^{q_3}(1) < R^{q_5}(1) < \ldots < 1 < \ldots < R^{q_6}(1) < R^{q_4}(1) < R^{q_2}(1).
$$

Now, given a critical quasicircle map $(f,X)$, we can keep track of the orbit of the critical point $c$. Let $I_n$ be the shortest arc in $X$ with endpoints $c$ and $f^{q_n}(c)$. The first return map to the interval $I_{n-1} \cup I_n$ is the pair of maps $FRM_n = \left( f^{q_n}|_{I_{n-1}}, f^{q_{n-1}}|_{I_n} \right)$. We can normalize this pair to unit size by the unique linear map $L_n$ sending $c$ to $0$ and the endpoint $f^{q_n}(c)$ to $1$. The $n$th **renormalization** of $f$ is the pair of holomorphic maps $R^n f = \left( L_n \circ f^{q_n} \circ L_n^{-1}|_{L_n(I_{n-1})}, L_n \circ f^{q_{n-1}} \circ L_n^{-1}|_{L_n(I_{n})} \right)$; in other words, renormalization is simply the rescaling of a first return map.

To simplify the argument, let's just assume that the rotation number $\theta$ of $(f,X)$ is the golden mean [1,1,1,1,\ldots ]$.

>**_Theorem (Renormalization fixed point): As $n\to \infty$, the renormalizations $R^n f$ of $(f,X)$ converge to a unique ``renormalization fixed point`` $f_* = (\alpha,\beta)$.

Lastly, there is a way to modify the renormalization operator $R$ so that $R$ takes a critical quasicircle map $(f,X)$ and spits out another critical quasicircle map $(\hat{f}, \hat{X})$, e.g. by gluing the ends of the quasiarc $I_{n-1} \cup I_n$ via some iterate of $f$, then $I_{n-1} \cup I_n$ projects to a quasicircle invariant under a new holomorphic map projected from $FRM_n$. By doing this very carefully, the renormalization operator $R$ can be shown to have analytic regularity as an operator between some Banach spaces of holomorphic maps.

>**_Theorem (Hyperbolicity): The fixed point $f_*$ of $R$ is hyperbolic and the stable manifold of $f_*$ has codimension one.

The proof of this theorem is also quite lengthy. I will state one particular consequence though:

>**_Corollary: Consider a critical quasicircle map $(f,X)$ with pre-periodic rotation number $\theta$. Pick a thin annular neighborhood $A$ of $X$ on which $f$ is defined, and pick a small $\varepsilon>0$. Within the Banach neighborhood of holomorphic maps $h: A \to \mathbb{C}$ admitting a single critical point and satisfying $\lVert f|_A -g \rVert <\varepsilon$ for some small $\varepsilon>0$, the set of maps $h$ that restricts to a critical quasicircle map with the same rotation number $\theta$ forms an analytic submanifold of codimension at most one. Within this submanifold, the invariant quasicircle of $h$ moves holomorphically.

Of course, conjecturally, this should be true for all bounded type rotation number, and the codimension should really be equal to one. Hopefully, I can address this problem in the future...

------
